NAT traversal info (#485)
submariner-io/submariner-website: src/content/operations/nat-traversal/_index.en.md

##### On the 1.1.1.1 router

| External IP | Port | Internal IP   | Port | Protocol |
|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 1.1.1.1     | 4501 | 10.0.0.1      | 4501 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4491 | 10.0.0.1      | 4491 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4502 | 10.1.0.1      | 4502 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4492 | 10.1.0.1      | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues, this happens due to the fact that route's NAT will not generally modify the src port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity, but if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT, or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502,4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

### Double NAT Traversal

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1VTxw02pmAgE1WeGX5vWfSswZNciK-5AC -->
![on-premises vs on-premises](/images/natt/double_nat_scenario.svg)

> Let's see why in the following sections.

Reviewer: @mangelajo is this how you start this section or maybe you omitted some lines before?

Author: Hmm I probably should elaborate as for the other scenarios. thanks

`4500/udp` by default. This port can be customized per cluster and per gateway
and is published as part of the `Endpoint` objects.

### Public vs Private IP

`Endpoint` objects publish both a `PrivateIP` and a `PublicIP`. The `PrivateIP` is the IP assigned
to an interface on the gateway node where the `Endpoint` originated. The `PublicIP` is the source
IP for the packets sent from the gateway to the Internet which is discovered by default via
[ipify.org](https://ipify.org), [my-ip.io](https://my-ip.io) or [seeip.org](https://seeip.org).

Alternative methods can be configured on each gateway via:

```bash
kubectl label node $GW gateway.submariner.io/public-ip=<resolver>,[resolver...]
```

Resolvers are evaluated one by one, using the result of the first one to succeed.
`<resolver>` should be written in the following form: `method:parameter`, and the
following methods are implemented:

| Method   | Parameter                                               | Notes                                                    |
|:---------|:--------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------|

> |   api    | https endpoint to contact, for example api.ipify.org    | The result body is inspected looking for the IP address  |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|   api    | HTTPS endpoint to contact, for example api.ipify.org    | The result body is inspected looking for the IP address  |
```

> |   lb     | K8s service name for a service LoadBalancer in the      | A network load balancer should be used                   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|   lb     | Kubernetes Service name for a LoadBalancer type Service in the      | A network load balancer should be used                   |
```

tunnel encapsulation port.
If one of the gateways is designated as a _preferred server_, then only its `Endpoint` needs
to be reachable to the other endpoints. This can be accomplished by labelling the gateway's
Node, for example:

```bash
kubectl label node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/preferred-server=true
```

Each gateway implements a UDP NATT discovery protocol where each gateway queries the
gateways of the remote clusters on both the public and private IPs in order to
determine the most suitable IP and its NAT characteristics to use for the tunnel
connections, with a preference for the private IP.

This protocol is enabled by default on port 4490/UDP and can be individually assigned to
labeling the gateway nodes:

```bash
kubectl label node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
```

If the NATT discovery protocol fails to determine reachability between two endpoints then it
falls back to the NAT setting specified on join (the `natEnabled` field of the `Submariner` object or the
`--natt` parameter of `subctl`), that is, if NAT is enabled, the public IP is used otherwise the private IP
is used.

> ### IP selection algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### IP Selection Algorithm
```

The following flow chart describes the IP selection algorithm:

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1e_M84l8iQH6U4QqD3-Jw2ypIWiRfLQkk -->
![Public/Private IP selection](/images/natt/public_private_selection_algorithm.svg)

> ### Port selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Port Selection
```

If the gateways of a cluster don't have public floating or elastic IPs assigned
to them then it's recommended to use a separate UDP port for every node marked
as a gateway. This will allow eventual port mapping on a router
when communicating to clusters on remote sites with no direct routing.

{{% notice note %}}
If a cluster is behind a router which will NAT the traffic, it's recommended to
map the open ports into the gateway node private IPs, see the port mapping
section. It could temporarily work without mapping, because most routers when
performing NAT to the external network will not randomize or modify the source
port of packets, but **this will happen as soon as two connections collide
over the same source port**.
{{% /notice %}}

> ## UDP Dataplane protocol (IPSEC & wireguard)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## UDP Dataplane Protocol (IPsec & WireGuard)
```

> By default submariner uses the 4500 UDP port for the dataplane. This can be changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Submariner uses the 4500 UDP port for the dataplane. This can be changed
```

cluster-wide via the `--nattport` flag on join although it's more advisable to specify
the port to be used per gateway node:

```bash
kubectl label node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
```

This allows individual gateways on the cluster to have different port numbers,
hence allowing individual port-mapping if a public IP is shared.

## IPsec

### ESP or UDP Encapsulation

> IPsec in the libreswan cable driver will be configured for the more performant ESP protocol

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IPsec in the Libreswan cable driver will be configured for the more performant ESP protocol
```

whenever possible, which is normally when NAT is not detected and connectivity over the private IP is possible.

If your network and routers filter the `IP>ESP` packets, encapsulation can be forced
by using the `--force-udp-encaps` during `subctl` join.

> ## Practical examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Practical Examples
```

> ### All private and routed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### All Private and Routed
```

This is the simplest practical case where all gateways can contact
all other gateways via routing on their private IPs and no NAT is needed.

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1IORJ9qW95qJ15P6Xk6idEfI4jj9Uo84l -->
![All private and routed](/images/natt/nat_scenario_all_private_routed.svg)

The NATT discovery protocol will determine that the private IPs are preferred, and
will try to avoid using NAT.

> ### All public cloud, with some private reachability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### All Public Cloud, with Some Private Reachability
```

| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | C              | 2.1.1.1        | 4500       | yes   |
| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.2        | 4500       | yes   |

The default configuration for the NATT discovery protocol on will detect the IPs to use, make
sure that the gateways have port 4490/udp open, as well as the encapsulation port `4500/udp`.

### Public Cloud vs On-Premises

In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, happening the
same for C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).

Between all other cluster pairs reachability is only possible over
their public IPs, the IP packets from A & B will undergo DNAT + SNAT translation at the
border via the elastic or floating IP,  the packets from C & D will undergo SNAT translation
to the public IP of the router 2.1.1.1 and also, while on transit via the public
network, the MTU will be limited to 1500 bytes or less.

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1tUJ3DOdaM1krgxrWXQ82zpIcdsh4liLv -->
![Public vs on-premises](/images/natt/nat_scenarios_1.svg)

> #### Endpoints for public-cloud to on-premises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Endpoints for Public Cloud to On-Premises
```

| Endpoint | Private IP      | Public IP |
|:---------|:----------------|:----------|
|   A      | 10.0.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   B      | 10.1.0.1        | 1.1.1.2   |
|   C      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |
|   D      | 192.168.128.4   | 2.1.1.1   |

> #### Connections for public-cloud to on-premises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Connections for Public Cloud to On-Premises
```

| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.1        | 4502       | yes   |

The recommended configuration for the gateways behind the on-premises router which has
a single external IP with no IP routing or mapping to the private network is to have a
dedicated and distinct port number for the NATT discovery protocol (as well as the encapsulation)

```bash
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

{{% notice warning %}}
If **HA** is configured on the on-premise clusters, **each gateway** behind the 2.1.1.1 router
**should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had 2 clusters and 2 gateways on each cluster, 4
ports would be necessary.
{{% /notice %}}

> #### Router port mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Router Port Mapping
```

Under this configuration it's important to map the UDP ports on the 2.1.1.1 router to the private
IPs of the gateways.

| External IP | Port | Internal IP   | Port | Protocol |
|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 2.1.1.1     | 4501 | 192.168.0.4   | 4501 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4491 | 192.168.0.4   | 4491 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4502 | 192.168.128.4 | 4502 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4492 | 192.168.128.4 | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues. This can happen because the router's NAT will not generally modify the source port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving on this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity. However if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502 or 4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

> #### Alternative to port mapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Alternative to Port Mapping
```

For example, given clusters A, B, C, and D, we designate A and B as preferred servers:

```bash
subctl join --kubeconfig A --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
subctl join --kubeconfig B --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
``

This means that the gateways for clusters A and B will negotiate which one will be the server
based on the `Endpoint` names. Clusters C and D will connect to clusters A and B as clients.
Clusters C and D will connect normally.

### Multiple on-premise sites

In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, happening the
same for C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).

Between all other cluster pairs reachability is only possible over
their public IPs, the IP packets from A,B,C & D will undergo SNAT translation at the
border with the public network also, while on transit via the public
network the MTU will be limited to 1500 bytes or less.

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1Nrbs6Kx3yuP23YlIfSbLIgXPRcmVjSMy -->
![on-premises vs on-premises](/images/natt/nat_scenarios_2.svg)

> #### Endpoints for multiple on-premises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Endpoints for Multiple On-Premises
```

| Endpoint | Private IP      | Public IP |
|:---------|:----------------|:----------|
|   A      | 10.0.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   B      | 10.1.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   C      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |
|   D      | 192.168.128.4   | 2.1.1.1   |

> #### Connections for multiple on-premises

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Connections for Multiple On-Premises
```

and the ports on the NAT gateway should be mapped to the internal IPs and ports of the gateways.

```bash
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in A B C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

{{% notice warning %}}
If **HA** is configured on the on-premises clusters, **each gateway** behind the routers
**should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had 2 clusters and 2 gateways on each network,
4 ports would be necessary.
{{% /notice %}}

> #### Router port mapping for multiple on-premise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Router Port Mapping for Multiple On-Oremises
```

| 2.1.1.1     | 4491 | 192.168.0.4   | 4491 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4502 | 192.168.128.4 | 4502 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4492 | 192.168.128.4 | 4492 | UDP      |

##### On the 1.1.1.1 router

| External IP | Port | Internal IP   | Port | Protocol |
|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 1.1.1.1     | 4501 | 10.0.0.1      | 4501 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4491 | 10.0.0.1      | 4491 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4502 | 10.1.0.1      | 4502 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4492 | 10.1.0.1      | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues, this happens due to the fact that route's NAT will not generally modify the src port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity, but if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT, or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502,4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

> ### Double NAT traversal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Double NAT Traversal
```

> This is a complicated topology that is still not supported in Submariner.

Reviewer: Maybe we can explain what it is before we say it's not supported?

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1VTxw02pmAgE1WeGX5vWfSswZNciK-5AC -->
![on-premises vs on-premises](/images/natt/double_nat_scenario.svg)

Let's see why in the following sections.

> #### Endpoints for double NAT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Endpoints for Double NAT
```

| Endpoint | Private IP      | Public IP |
|:---------|:----------------|:----------|
|   A      | 10.0.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   B      | 10.1.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   C      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |
|   D      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |

A problem will exist between C & D because they can't reach each other neither on 2.1.1.1
or ther IPs since the private CIDRs overlap.

Possible solutions to this could be:

* Modifying the CIDRs of the virtual networks for clusters C & D, and then
  peer the virtual routers of those virtual networks to perform routing between C & D. Then
  C & D would be able to connect over the private IPs to each other.

> * Allow in submariner (still not supported) the manual addition of multiple IPs per gateway, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow in Submariner (still not supported) the manual addition of multiple IPs per gateway, so
```

+++
title = "NAT Traversal"
date = 2020-08-12T16:02:00+02:00
weight = 25
+++

## Basic Overview

Submariner establishes the dataplane tunnels between clusters over port
`4500/UDP` by default. This port can be customized per cluster and per gateway
and is published as part of the `Endpoint` objects.

### Public vs Private IP

`Endpoint` objects publish both a `PrivateIP` and a `PublicIP`. The `PrivateIP` is the IP assigned
to an interface on the gateway node where the `Endpoint` originated. The `PublicIP` is the source
IP for the packets sent from the gateway to the Internet which is discovered by default via

> [ipify.org](https://ipify.org), [my-ip.io](https://my-ip.io) or [seeip.org](https://seeip.org).

Reviewer 2: Does it mean that in the default configuration, we will try one after the other and use the one that is successful?
Or we just use ipify.org alone?

Author: I will clarify, those are fallback mechanisms, if ipify fails my-ip is tried, otherwise seeip.org

Author: Done

> Alternative methods can be configured on each gateway via:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Alternative methods can be configured on each gateway Node via the `gateway.submariner.io/public-ip` annotation:
```

```bash
kubectl annotate node $GW gateway.submariner.io/public-ip=<resolver>,[resolver...]
```

Resolvers are evaluated one by one, using the result of the first one to succeed.
`<resolver>` should be written in the following form: `method:parameter`, and the
following methods are implemented:

| Method   | Parameter                                                 | Notes                                                    |
|:---------|:----------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------|
|   api    | HTTPS endpoint to contact, for example api.ipify.org      | The result body is inspected looking for the IP address  |

> |   lb     | LoadBalancer Service name in the Submariner namespace     | A network load balancer should be used                   |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|   lb     | LoadBalancer Service name in the submariner-operator namespace| A network load balancer should be used                   |
```

|   ipv4   | Fixed IPv4 address used as public IP                      |                                                          |
|   dns    | FQDN DNS entry to be resolved                             | The A entry of the FQDN will be resolved and used        |

> For example, when using a fixed public IPv4 address to for a gateway, this can be used:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, when using a fixed public IPv4 address for a gateway, this can be used:
```

```bash

> kubectl annotate node $GW gateway.submariner.io/public-ip=ipv4:1.2.3.4

Reviewer 2: Just an observation: In the examples below, we are using $NODE and here we are using $GW.

Author: Ack I will update all to $GW or $NODE

Author: Done

```

### Reachability

For two gateway `Endpoints` to connect to one another, at least one of them should be reachable
either on its public or private IP address and the firewall configuration should allow the
tunnel encapsulation port.
If one of the gateways is designated as a _preferred server_, then only its `Endpoint` needs
to be reachable to the other endpoints. This can be accomplished by annotating the gateway's
Node, for example:

```bash

> kubectl annotate node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/preferred-server=true

Author: This is actually false unless we merge this: https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/pull/1377

I think it would be nice to merge, because then all those details can be configured equally. We also have the cluster setting --preferred-server at join which will override the default "false" to "true"

@sridhargaddam @nyechiel @tpantelis what do you think?

Author: I'm updating this  `kubectl annotate node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/preferred-server=true` to the truth ;)

```

> Each gateway implements a UDP NATT discovery protocol where each gateway queries the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each gateway implements a UDP NAT-T discovery protocol where each gateway queries the
```

gateways of the remote clusters on both the public and private IPs in order to
determine the most suitable IP and its NAT characteristics to use for the tunnel
connections, with a preference for the private IP.

> This protocol is enabled by default on port `4490/UDP` and can be individually assigned by

Reviewer 2: If the protocol is enabled by default, do we still have to individually annotate the gateway node? Or Annotate only if we want to use a non-default Port? Can you please clarify?

Author: I will clarify, it's only for non-default ports now.

Author: Done.

is used.

### IP Selection Algorithm

The following flow chart describes the IP selection algorithm:

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1e_M84l8iQH6U4QqD3-Jw2ypIWiRfLQkk -->
![Public/Private IP selection](/images/natt/public_private_selection_algorithm.svg)

### Port Selection

If the gateways of a cluster don't have public floating or elastic IPs assigned
to them then it's recommended to use a separate UDP port for every node marked
as a gateway. This will allow eventual port mapping on a router
when communicating to clusters on remote sites with no direct routing.

{{% notice note %}}
If a cluster is behind a router which will NAT the traffic, it's recommended to
map the open ports into the gateway node private IPs, see the port mapping
section. It could temporarily work without mapping, because most routers when
performing NAT to the external network will not randomize or modify the source
port of packets, but **this will happen as soon as two connections collide
over the same source port**.
{{% /notice %}}

## UDP Dataplane Protocol (IPsec & WireGuard)

By default, Submariner uses the `4500/UDP` port for the dataplane. This can be changed

> cluster-wide via the `--nattport` flag on join although it's recommended to specify

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cluster-wide via the `--nattport` flag on join although it's possible to specify
```

A recommendation may imply that users should use it in all scenarios.

Author: I wanted to imply it, but I admit it's grey area.

![Public vs on-premises](/images/natt/nat_scenario_all_public.svg)

#### Endpoints

| Endpoint | Private IP      | Public IP |
|:---------|:----------------|:----------|
|   A      | 10.0.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   B      | 10.1.0.1        | 1.1.1.2   |
|   C      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |
|   D      | 192.168.128.4   | 2.1.1.2   |

#### Connections

| Left Cluster |  Left IP     | Left Port | Right Cluster  | Right IP       | Right Port | NAT   |
|:-------------|:-------------|:----------|:---------------|:---------------|:-----------|:------|
| A            |  10.0.0.1    | 4500      | B              | 10.1.0.1       | 4500       | no    |
| C            |  192.168.0.4 | 4500      | D              | 192.168.128.4  | 4500       | no    |
| A            |  1.1.1.1     | 4500      | C              | 2.1.1.1        | 4500       | yes   |
| A            |  1.1.1.1     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.2        | 4500       | yes   |
| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | C              | 2.1.1.1        | 4500       | yes   |
| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.2        | 4500       | yes   |

> The default configuration for the NATT discovery protocol on will detect the IPs to use, make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default configuration for the NAT-T discovery protocol will detect the IPs to use, make
```

sure that the gateways have port 4490/udp open, as well as the encapsulation port `4500/udp`.

### Public Cloud vs On-Premises

In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private

> IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, happening the
> same for C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities. The
same is true for the C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).
```

NAT or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502 or 4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Alternative to Port Mapping

If port mapping is not possible, we can enable a server/client model for connections
where we designate the clusters with a dedicated public IP or the clusters with the
ability to get mapped ports as **preferred servers**. In this way, only the non-preferred
server clusters will initiate connections to the preferred server clusters.

For example, given clusters A, B, C, and D, we designate A and B as preferred servers:

```bash
subctl join --kubeconfig A --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
subctl join --kubeconfig B --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
```

This means that the gateways for clusters A and B will negotiate which one will be the server
based on the `Endpoint` names. Clusters C and D will connect to clusters A and B as clients.
Clusters C and D will connect normally.

### Multiple on-premise sites

In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private

> IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, happening the
> same for C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities. The
same is true for the C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).
```

|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 1.1.1.1     | 4501 | 10.0.0.1      | 4501 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4491 | 10.0.0.1      | 4491 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4502 | 10.1.0.1      | 4502 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4492 | 10.1.0.1      | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues, this happens due to the fact that route's NAT will not generally modify the src port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity, but if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT, or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502,4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

### Double NAT Traversal

In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, while between cluster
C and D (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.0.4 too), reachability over the private IPs is not possible

> but it would be possible over the private floating IPs 10.2.0.1 and 10.2.0.2, still Submariner
> is unable to detect such floating IPs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but it would be possible over the private floating IPs 10.2.0.1 and 10.2.0.2. However Submariner
is unable to detect such floating IPs.
```

+++
title = "NAT Traversal"
date = 2020-08-12T16:02:00+02:00
weight = 25
+++

## Basic Overview

Submariner establishes the dataplane tunnels between clusters over port

> `4500/udp` by default. This port can be customized per cluster and per gateway

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`4500/UDP` by default. This port can be customized per cluster and per gateway
```

to an interface on the gateway node where the `Endpoint` originated. The `PublicIP` is the source
IP for the packets sent from the gateway to the Internet which is discovered by default via
[ipify.org](https://ipify.org), [my-ip.io](https://my-ip.io) or [seeip.org](https://seeip.org).

Alternative methods can be configured on each gateway via:

```bash
kubectl annotate node $GW gateway.submariner.io/public-ip=<resolver>,[resolver...]
```

Resolvers are evaluated one by one, using the result of the first one to succeed.
`<resolver>` should be written in the following form: `method:parameter`, and the
following methods are implemented:

| Method   | Parameter                                                       | Notes                                                    |
|:---------|:----------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------|
|   api    | HTTPS endpoint to contact, for example api.ipify.org            | The result body is inspected looking for the IP address  |
|   lb     | Kubernetes Service name for a LoadBalancer type Service in the  | A network load balancer should be used                   |

> |          | Submariner namespace                                            |                                                          |

Reviewer: There is an extra row that needs to be removed here

|   ipv4   | Fixed IPv4 address used as public IP                            |                                                          |

> |   dns    | FQDN DNS entry to be resolved                                   | the A entry of the FQDN will be resolved and used        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|   dns    | FQDN DNS entry to be resolved                                   | The A entry of the FQDN will be resolved and used        |
```

For example, when using a fixed public IPv4 address to for a gateway, this can be used:

```bash
kubectl annotate node $GW gateway.submariner.io/public-ip=ipv4:1.2.3.4
```

### Reachability

For two gateway `Endpoints` to connect to one another, at least one of them should be reachable
either on its public or private IP address and the firewall configuration should allow the
tunnel encapsulation port.
If one of the gateways is designated as a _preferred server_, then only its `Endpoint` needs
to be reachable to the other endpoints. This can be accomplished by annotating the gateway's
Node, for example:

```bash
kubectl annotate node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/preferred-server=true
```

Each gateway implements a UDP NATT discovery protocol where each gateway queries the
gateways of the remote clusters on both the public and private IPs in order to
determine the most suitable IP and its NAT characteristics to use for the tunnel
connections, with a preference for the private IP.

> This protocol is enabled by default on port 4490/UDP and can be individually assigned by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This protocol is enabled by default on port `4490/UDP` and can be individually assigned by
```

`--natt` parameter of `subctl`), that is, if NAT is enabled, the public IP is used otherwise the private IP
is used.

### IP Selection Algorithm

The following flow chart describes the IP selection algorithm:

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1e_M84l8iQH6U4QqD3-Jw2ypIWiRfLQkk -->
![Public/Private IP selection](/images/natt/public_private_selection_algorithm.svg)

### Port Selection

If the gateways of a cluster don't have public floating or elastic IPs assigned
to them then it's recommended to use a separate UDP port for every node marked
as a gateway. This will allow eventual port mapping on a router
when communicating to clusters on remote sites with no direct routing.

{{% notice note %}}
If a cluster is behind a router which will NAT the traffic, it's recommended to
map the open ports into the gateway node private IPs, see the port mapping
section. It could temporarily work without mapping, because most routers when
performing NAT to the external network will not randomize or modify the source
port of packets, but **this will happen as soon as two connections collide
over the same source port**.
{{% /notice %}}

## UDP Dataplane Protocol (IPsec & WireGuard)

> By default, Submariner uses the 4500 UDP port for the dataplane. This can be changed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Submariner uses the `4500/UDP` port for the dataplane. This can be changed
```

> cluster-wide via the `--nattport` flag on join although it's more advisable to specify

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cluster-wide via the `--nattport` flag on join although it's recommended to specify
```

| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | C              | 2.1.1.1        | 4501       | yes   |
| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.1        | 4502       | yes   |

The recommended configuration for the gateways behind the on-premises router which has
a single external IP with no IP routing or mapping to the private network is to have a
dedicated and distinct port number for the NATT discovery protocol (as well as the encapsulation)

```bash
kubectl annotate node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl annotate node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl annotate node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl annotate node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

{{% notice warning %}}
If **HA** is configured on the on-premise clusters, **each gateway** behind the 2.1.1.1 router

> **should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had 2 clusters and 2 gateways on each cluster, 4

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had two clusters and two gateways on each cluster, four
```

Reviewer: One final nit for consistency with L321

Author: Done :-)

| 2.1.1.1     | 4502 | 192.168.128.4 | 4502 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4492 | 192.168.128.4 | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues. This can happen because the router's NAT will not generally modify the source port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving on this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity. However if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502 or 4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Alternative to Port Mapping

If port mapping is not possible, we can enable a server/client model for connections
where we designate the clusters with a dedicated public IP or the clusters with the
ability to get mapped ports as **preferred servers**. In this way, only the non-preferred
server clusters will initiate connections to the preferred server clusters.

For example, given clusters A, B, C, and D, we designate A and B as preferred servers:

> ```bash
> subctl join --kubeconfig A --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
> subctl join --kubeconfig B --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
> ``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
subctl join --kubeconfig A --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
subctl join --kubeconfig B --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
```
```

Reviewer: There is a missing ` at the end of the bash section

Every gateway must have its own port number for NATT discovery, as well as for encapsulation,
and the ports on the NAT gateway should be mapped to the internal IPs and ports of the gateways.

```bash
kubectl annotate node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl annotate node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl annotate node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl annotate node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502
kubectl annotate node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl annotate node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl annotate node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl annotate node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in A B C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

{{% notice warning %}}
If **HA** is configured on the on-premises clusters, **each gateway** behind the routers

> **should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had 2 clusters and 2 gateways on each network,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had two clusters and two gateways on each network,
```

> 4 ports would be necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
four ports would be necessary.
```

ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
{{% /notice %}}

### Double NAT Traversal

In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, while between cluster
C and D (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.0.4 too), reachability over the private IPs is not possible
but it would be possible over the private floating IPs 10.2.0.1 and 10.2.0.2, still Submariner
is unable to detect such floating IPs.

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1VTxw02pmAgE1WeGX5vWfSswZNciK-5AC -->
![on-premises vs on-premises](/images/natt/double_nat_scenario.svg)

#### Endpoints for Double NAT

| Endpoint | Private IP      | Public IP |
|:---------|:----------------|:----------|
|   A      | 10.0.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   B      | 10.1.0.1        | 1.1.1.1   |
|   C      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |
|   D      | 192.168.0.4     | 2.1.1.1   |

A problem will exist between C & D because they can't reach each other neither on 2.1.1.1
or ther IPs since the private CIDRs overlap.

> This is a complicated topology that is still not supported in Submariner, possible solutions to this could be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a complicated topology that is still not supported in Submariner. Possible solutions to this could be:
```

* Modifying the CIDRs of the virtual networks for clusters C & D, and then
  peer the virtual routers of those virtual networks to perform routing between C & D. Then
  C & D would be able to connect over the private IPs to each other.

> * Allow in Submariner (still not supported) the manual addition of multiple IPs per gateway, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support manual addition of multiple IPs per gateway, so
```

+++
title = "NAT Traversal"
date = 2020-08-12T16:02:00+02:00
weight = 25
+++

## Basic Overview

> Submariner establishes the dataplane encapsulation between clusters over port

Reviewer 2: Just a nit: Not sure if its only me, but I find "tunnels" to be more readable compared to "dataplane encapsulation".

`4500/udp` by default,  that port can be customized per cluster and per gateway,
and it's published as part of the `Endpoint` objects in the broker, as `udp-port`

> inside of the `BackendConfig` field.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Submariner establishes the dataplane tunnels between clusters over port
`4500/udp` by default. This port can be customized per cluster and per gateway
and is published as part of the `Endpoint` objects.
```

### Public vs Private IP

`Endpoint` objects publish the reachable IPs discovered by the gateway. A
`PrivateIP` which is the IP assigned an interface on the gateway node where
that `Endpoint` belongs, and `PublicIP` which is the src IP for the packets
sent from the gateway to the Internet, currently we discover such IP via

> [ipify.org](https://ipify.org) but other mechanisms will be added in the future.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`Endpoint` objects publish both a `PrivateIP` and a `PublicIP`. The `PrivateIP` is the IP assigned
to an interface on the gateway node where the `Endpoint` originated. The `PublicIP` is the source IP for the packets sent from the gateway to the Internet which is currently assigned via
[ipify.org](https://ipify.org) although other mechanisms may be added in the future.
```

### Reachability

For two endpoints to connect to each other, they must be mutually reachable on

> either the public or private IP and the dataplane encapsulation UDP port.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For two endpoints to connect to each other, at least one of them should be reachable either on the public or private IP address and firewall configuration should allow the dataplane encapsulation port.
```

tunnel encapsulation port.
Using the `gateway.submariner.io/preferred-server=true` label only the labeled side

> needs to be reachable to other endpoints. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For two gateway `Endpoints` to connect to one another, at least one of them should be reachable
either on its public or private IP address and the firewall configuration should allow the
tunnel encapsulation port.
If one of the gateways is designated as a _preferred server_, then only its `Endpoint` needs to be reachable to the other endpoints. This can be accomplished by labelling the gateway's Node, for example:
```

```bash
kubectl label node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/preferred-server=true
```

Each gateway implements a UDP NATT discovery protocol where each gateway queries the
gateways of the remote clusters on both the public & private IPs, figuring out the
most suitable IP for the cable driver to use with preference on the private IP

> and the NAT characteristics of the path.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
gateways of the remote clusters on both the public and private IPs in order to determine the
most suitable IP to use for the tunnel connection, with a preference for the private IP
its NAT characteristics.
```

Author: "
preference for the private IP its NAT characteristics."  doesn't make sense to me, I'll use your suggestions to make another rephrase. Thanks tom

Author: Done

This protocol is disabled by default, and should be enabled by assigning an UDP

> port to each gateway node on each cluster.

Reviewer 3: It's now enabled by default.

```suggestion
This protocol is enabled by default and uses UDP port 4490. The port can be customized via setting a label on the gateway's Node, for example
```

Author: Let's make this update later on a separate PR, we can then update this change in 0.9 too if we backport the default enable.

Author: ok, I'm doing it on this PR, and let's backport the default enable patches too.

```bash
kubectl label node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
```

> 

Reviewer 2: We should also add a note that firewall configuration should allow UDP/4490 in such cases.

Author: Done, added to getting-started/_index.md

If the protocol has been enabled, and no reachability is possible between the
endpoints the default algorithm will be used (which can be controlled with the
NAT field of the operator or --natt parameter during subctl join), `--natt=false`
will attempt the connection the the PrivateIP, `--natt=true` will attempt the

> connection to the PublicIP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the protocol has been enabled, and no reachability is possible between the
endpoints the default settings will be used (which can be controlled with the
NAT field of the operator or --natt parameter during subctl join), `--natt=false`
will attempt the connection using the PrivateIP, `--natt=true` will attempt the
connection using the PublicIP.
```

> connection using the PublicIP.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the NATT discovery protocol fails to determine reachability between two endpoints then it
falls back to the NAT setting specified on join (the `natEnabled` field of the `Submariner` object or the
`--natt` parameter of `subctl`), that is, if NAT is enabled, the public IP is used otherwise the private IP
is used.
```

### IP selection algorithm

The following flow chart describes the IP selection algorithm:

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1e_M84l8iQH6U4QqD3-Jw2ypIWiRfLQkk -->

> ![Public/Private IP selection](/images/natt/public_private_selection_algorithm.svg)

Reviewer 2: this image is not getting rendered when I click on view this file. Can you please check

Author: Weird, it works for me in both github (if I click the file) or make server.

> ![Public/Private IP selection](/images/natt/public_private_selection_algorithm.svg)

Reviewer 3: This diagram is cool but I wonder if we should include this much implementation detail in the end user guide. This can easily become stale - if the algorithm is changed in any way then we'd have to remember to update this diagram which may be problematic.

Author: Yeah, that's a good point, hopefully this algorithm shouldn't really change much and can be helpful for debugging issues. We can always kill it later.

Also all-text-docs are quite un-engaging :-)

Reviewer 3: It can be helpful for devs but we don't have low-level implementation flow diagrams for other components on the website. I think these are more suited for the individual projects.

Reviewer 3: > ...hopefully this algorithm shouldn't really change much...
> 

It would a bit if we end up keeping https://github.com/submariner-io/submariner/pull/1209 😄

Author: But the behavior is the same right?, we just change how it's really implemented, and when do we notify the cable engine of the public or privateIP. Still the overall behavior is the same.

I still it can be helpful to admins to understand what's going on and what do we make us decide between one IP or the other.

I can remove it too if we think it's better to keep it off.

@nyechiel @skitt what are your opinions ^ ?  I'm fine with either :)

Reviewer: Since it's a fairly big change in a core area, I think it makes sense to include all that info for now. I hope that we can trim it down once it's becoming more mature and we learn from users what is trivial and what not. If we remove it at some point, let's ensure it's not going away and included for e.g within the enhancement repo.

Reviewer 2: ++ to keep it as @nyechiel mentioned.

### Port selection

> If the gateways of your cluster don't have public floating or elastic IPs assigned
> to them then it's recommended to use a separate UDP port for every node marked
> as gateway in your cluster, this will allow eventual port mapping on a router if
> when communicating to clusters on remote sites with no direct routing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the gateways of a cluster don't have public floating or elastic IPs assigned
to them then it's recommended to use a separate UDP port for every node marked
as a gateway. This will allow eventual port mapping on a router
when communicating to clusters on remote sites with no direct routing.
```

{{% notice note %}}

> If your cluster is behind a router which will NAT your traffic it's recommended to
> map the open ports into your gateway node private IPs, see the port mapping
> section. It could temporarily work without mapping, because most routers when

Reviewer 3: "_see the port mapping section_" - where is this section? Link to it?

```suggestion
If a cluster is behind a router which will NAT the traffic, it's recommended to
map the open ports into the gateway node private IPs, see the port mapping
section. It could temporarily work without mapping, because most routers when
```

performing NAT to the external network will not randomize or modify the source
port of packets, but **this will happen as soon as two connections collide
over the same source port**.
{{% /notice %}}

## UDP Dataplane protocol (IPSEC & wireguard)

> By default submariner uses the 4500 UDP port for the dataplane. The cluster-wide default
> can be changed with the `subctl join` `--nattport` flag.
> 
> Although, it's more advisable to specify the port to be used per gateway node:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default submariner uses the 4500 UDP port for the dataplane. This can be changed cluster-wide via the `--nattport` flag on join although it's more advisable to specify the port to be used per gateway node:
```

```bash
kubectl label node $NODE gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
```

this allows individual gateways on the cluster to have different port numbers,

> hence allowing individual port-mapping on if a public IP is shared.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows individual gateways on the cluster to have different port numbers,
hence allowing individual port-mapping if a public IP is shared.
```

> ## IPSEC

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## IPsec
```

### ESP or UDP Encapsulation

IPSEC in the libreswan cable driver will be configured for ESP protocol (more performant)
whenever that is possible, that's normally when NAT is not detected, likely to happen

> when connectivity over the private IP is possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
IPsec in the libreswan cable driver will be configured for ESP protocol (more performant)
whenever that is possible, that's normally when NAT is not detected, likely to happen
when connectivity over the private IP is possible.
```

> IPsec in the libreswan cable driver will be configured for ESP protocol (more performant)
> whenever that is possible, that's normally when NAT is not detected, likely to happen
> when connectivity over the private IP is possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
IPsec in the libreswan cable driver will be configured for the more performant ESP protocol
whenever possible, which is normally when NAT is not detected and connectivity over the private IP is possible.
```

> If your network and routers filter the `IP>ESP` packets encapsulation can be forced

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your network and routers filter the `IP>ESP` packets, encapsulation can be forced
```

If your network and routers filter the `IP>ESP` packets, encapsulation can be forced

> by using the `--force-udp-encaps` during subctl join, or by setting the operator `

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
by using the `--force-udp-encaps` during `subctl` join.
```

## Practical examples

### All private and routed

> This is the simplest practical case, in this case all gateways can contact
> all other gateways via routing on their private IPs, and no NAT happens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the simplest practical case where all gateways can contact
all other gateways via routing on their private IPs and no NAT is needed.
```

<!-- source: https://app.diagrams.net/#G1IORJ9qW95qJ15P6Xk6idEfI4jj9Uo84l -->
![All private and routed](/images/natt/nat_scenario_all_private_routed.svg)

Two configuration alternatives exist:

* Enabling the NATT discovery protocol on all gateway nodes:

```bash
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in A B C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

* Deploy the clusters with `subctl join --natt=false`

{{% notice note %}}
The first alternative is the preferred one, since it will allow the eventual
addition of a cluster on a public cloud, or a remote site with no direct IP
reachability or NATed reachability.

> {{% /notice %}}

Reviewer 3: I assume we don't need this section since NATT discovery is enabled by default.

Author: Same comments as above, I will do the default-enabled update on a second PR, to backport this update first into website 0.9

Author: Done.

### All public cloud, with some private reachability

> In this case case, A & B cluster gateways have direct reachability over their private
> IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities, happening the
> same for C & D cluster gateways (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case case, the gateways for clusters A and B have direct reachability over their private
IPs (10.0.0.1 and 10.1.0.1) possibly with large MTU capabilities.  The
same is true for clusters C and D (192.168.0.4 and 192.168.128.4).
```

> Between A & C , A & D, B & C, and B & D reachability is still possible over
> the public IP, the IP packets will undergo DNAT + SNAT translation at the
> border via the elastic or floating IP, and also while on transit via the public
> network the MTU will be limited to 1500 bytes or less.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Reachability between the two pairs of clusters is only possible over
their public IPs and the IP packets will undergo DNAT + SNAT translation at the
border via the elastic or floating IP and also, while on transit via the public
network, the MTU will be limited to 1500 bytes or less.
```

Author: A & B and C&D reach over their private IPs so not all two pairs of clusters connect via public IPs.

Author: I rephrased some bits and applied.

| A            |  1.1.1.1     | 4500      | C              | 2.1.1.1        | 4500       | yes   |
| A            |  1.1.1.1     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.2        | 4500       | yes   |
| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | C              | 2.1.1.1        | 4500       | yes   |
| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.2        | 4500       | yes   |

The recommended configuration is enabling the NATT discovery protocol on
all ports, and make sure that the gateways have such port open (as well as the
encapsulation port `4500/udp` by default)

```bash
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in A B C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done

> ```

Reviewer 3: Remove since NATT discovery protocol is enabled by default?

Author: Makes sense, will do on separate PR.

Author: Done now

It is also possible, but not recommended to deploy with `subctl join --natt=true`,
in this case the public IP will be used in all cases, even between A&B and C&D, but
the maximum performance of communications between those clusters will not be possible

> since the traffic will transit the public network limiting their MTU to 1500 bytes.

Reviewer 3: This would also entail disabling the NATT discovery protocol - do we need this?

Author: ditto

Author: Removed.

### Public Cloud vs On-Premises

> 

Reviewer 3: This section looks similar to the one above so comments apply here as well.

Author: Ack will transpose here

Author: Done.

| B            |  1.1.1.2     | 4500      | D              | 2.1.1.1        | 4502       | yes   |

The recommended configuration is enabling the NATT discovery protocol on
all ports, and make sure that the gateways have such port open, the gateways behind
the on-premises router which has a single external IP with no IP routing or mapping to the
private network should have a dedicated and distinct port number for the NATT discovery
protocol (as well as the encapsulation)

```bash
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4490
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in A B C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

{{% notice warning %}}

> If **HA** is configured on the on-premises clusters, **each gateway** behind the 2.1.1.1 router

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If **HA** is configured on the on-premise clusters, **each gateway** behind the 2.1.1.1 router
```

**should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had 2 clusters and 2 gateways on each cluster, 4
ports would be necessary.
{{% /notice %}}

#### Router port mapping

Under this configuration it's important to map the UDP ports on the 2.1.1.1 router to the private
IPs of the gateways.

| External IP | Port | Internal IP   | Port | Protocol |
|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 2.1.1.1     | 4501 | 192.168.0.4   | 4501 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4491 | 192.168.0.4   | 4491 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4502 | 192.168.128.4 | 4502 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4492 | 192.168.128.4 | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}

> Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
> issues, this happens due to the fact that route's NAT will not generally modify the src port
> of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving this port will be redirected to the
> internal IP which initiated connectivity, but if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
> NAT, or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502,4491-4492
> ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues. This can happen because the router's NAT will not generally modify the source port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving on this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity. However if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502 or 4491-4492
ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.
```

{{% /notice %}}

#### Alternative to port mapping

If port mapping is not possible, we can enable a server/client model for connections

> where we designate the clusters with a dedicated public IP, or the clusters with the
> ability to get mapped ports, as servers. In this way the other gateways on the Submariner
> network  will attempt (and not expect) connections to the remote endpoints, if such endpoints
> are designated as **preferred servers**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
where we designate the clusters with a dedicated public IP or the clusters with the
ability to get mapped ports as **preferred servers**. In this way, only the non-preferred server clusters will initiate connections to the preferred server clusters.
```

> ```bash
> subctl join --kubeconfig A --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
> subctl join --kubeconfig B --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
> ```
> 
> This will mean that cluster A & B gateways will connect to each other negotiating
> which one will be server based on the Endpoint names, cluster C will connect to cluster A & B
> as a client, cluster D will connect to cluster A & B as a client, cluster C & D will connect
> normally.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, given clusters A, B, C, and D, we designate A and B as preferred servers:

```bash
subctl join --kubeconfig A --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
subctl join --kubeconfig B --preferred-server .... broker_info.subm
``

This means that the gateways for clusters A and B will negotiate which one will be the server based on the `Endpoint` names. Clusters C and D will connect to clusters A and B as clients. Clusters C and D will connect normally.
```

> ### Multiple on-premises sites

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Multiple on-premise sites
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Similar comments for this section as above.

Author: Ack I will do it manually

Author: Done.

the NATT discovery protocol, as well as for encapsulation protocol.

```bash
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl label node $GWA --kubeconfig A gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl label node $GWB --kubeconfig B gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4491
kubectl label node $GWC --kubeconfig C gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4501
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/natt-discovery-port=4492
kubectl label node $GWD --kubeconfig D gateway.submariner.io/udp-port=4502

# restart the gateways to pick up the new setting
for cluster in A B C D;
do
  kubectl delete pod -n submariner-operator -l app=submariner-gateway --kubeconfig $cluster
done
```

{{% notice warning %}}
If **HA** is configured on the on-premises clusters, **each gateway** behind the routers
**should have a dedicated UDP port**. For example if we had 2 clusters and 2 gateways on each network,
4 ports would be necessary.
{{% /notice %}}

> #### Router port mapping for multiple on-premises

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Router port mapping for multiple on-premise
```

|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 2.1.1.1     | 4501 | 192.168.0.4   | 4501 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4491 | 192.168.0.4   | 4491 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4502 | 192.168.128.4 | 4502 | UDP      |
| 2.1.1.1     | 4492 | 192.168.128.4 | 4492 | UDP      |

##### On the 1.1.1.1 router

| External IP | Port | Internal IP   | Port | Protocol |
|:------------|:-----|:--------------|:-----|:---------|
| 1.1.1.1     | 4501 | 10.0.0.1      | 4501 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4491 | 10.0.0.1      | 4491 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4502 | 10.1.0.1      | 4502 | UDP      |
| 1.1.1.1     | 4492 | 10.1.0.1      | 4492 | UDP      |

{{% notice note %}}
Without port mapping it's entirely possible that the connectivity will be established without
issues, this happens due to the fact that route's NAT will not generally modify the src port
of the outgoing UDP packets, and future packets arriving this port will be redirected to the
internal IP which initiated connectivity, but if the 2.1.1.1 router randomizes the source port on
NAT, or if other applications on the internal network were already using the 4501-4502,4491-4492

> ports, the remote ends would not be able to contact gateway C or D over the expected ports.

Reviewer 3: Similar changes as with the section starting on L266.

Author: done.
